Project flags, for global config defaults + behavior change migrations (#4814)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/global-configs/about-global-configs.md

- Certain flags can only be set in `dbt_project.yml`, and cannot be overridden for specific invocations via CLI option.
- If a CLI option is supported by specific commands, rather than supported by all commands ("global"), it is generally not considered to be a "flag".

### Setting flags

There are multiple ways of setting flags, which depend on the use case:
- **[Project-level `flags` (`dbt_project.yml`)](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/global-configs/project-flags):** Define version-controlled defaults for everyone running this project. Preserve legacy behaviors until their slated deprecation.
- **[Environment variables](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/global-configs/environment-variable-configs):** Define behavior that should be different in different runtime environments (development vs. production vs. [continuous integration](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/deploy/continuous-integration), or different for different users in development (based on personal preferences).
- **[CLI options](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/global-configs/command-line-options):** Define behavior specific to _this invocation_. Supported for all dbt commands.

> The precedence order is CLI > Env Var > Project.

Reviewer: In this particular case, it's not obvious if the `>` are "greater (precedence) than" or if they are more like directional arrows.

Generally, it would be nice to have consistent and clear ways to communicate the precedence of various things. See https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/4371 for a request for some standardization across our docs.

---
title: "About flags (global configs)"
id: "about-global-configs"
sidebar: "About flags (global configs)"
---

In dbt, "flags" (also called "global configs") are configurations for fine-tuning _how_ dbt runs your project. They differ from [resource-specific configs](/reference/configs-and-properties) that tell dbt about _what_ to run.

> Flags control things like the visual output of logs, whether to treat specific warning messages as errors, or whether to "fail fast" after encountering the first error. These flags are "global" because they are available for all dbt commands, and because they can be set in multiple places.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Flags control things like the visual output of logs, whether to treat specific warning messages as errors, or whether to "fail fast" after encountering the first error. Flags are "global" configs because they are available for all dbt commands and they can be set in multiple places.
```

> There is significant overlap between dbt's flags and dbt's command line options, but they are not the same:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is a significant overlap between dbt's flags and dbt's command line options, but there are differences:
```

> - Certain flags can only be set in `dbt_project.yml`, and cannot be overridden for specific invocations via CLI option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Certain flags can only be set in `dbt_project.yml` and cannot be overridden for specific invocations via CLI options.
```

- If a CLI option is supported by specific commands, rather than supported by all commands ("global"), it is generally not considered to be a "flag".

### Setting flags

There are multiple ways of setting flags, which depend on the use case:

> - **[Project-level `flags` (`dbt_project.yml`)](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/global-configs/project-flags):** Define version-controlled defaults for everyone running this project. Preserve legacy behaviors until their slated deprecation.

Reviewer 2: Did you intend to use the full URL for these links? That will open them in a new tab rather than in the current tab as the other links on this page are configured.

Reviewer: It appears like the full URLs were an accident that were inherited from a previous PR.

So I'm going to remove the hard-coded link in favor of relative ones.

> - **[Project-level `flags` (`dbt_project.yml`)](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/global-configs/project-flags):** Define version-controlled defaults for everyone running this project. Preserve legacy behaviors until their slated deprecation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[Project-level `flags` (`dbt_project.yml`)](/reference/global-configs/project-flags):** Define version-controlled defaults for everyone running this project. Preserve legacy behaviors until their slated deprecation.
```

> - **[Environment variables](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/global-configs/environment-variable-configs):** Define behavior that should be different in different runtime environments (development vs. production vs. [continuous integration](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/deploy/continuous-integration), or different for different users in development (based on personal preferences).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **[Environment variables](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/global-configs/environment-variable-configs):** Define different behavior in different runtime environments (development vs. production vs. [continuous integration](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/deploy/continuous-integration), or different behavior for different users in development (based on personal preferences).
```

> - **[CLI options](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/global-configs/command-line-options):** Define behavior specific to _this invocation_. Supported for all dbt commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[Environment variables](/reference/global-configs/environment-variable-configs):** Define different behavior in different runtime environments (development vs. production vs. [continuous integration](/docs/deploy/continuous-integration), or different behavior for different users in development (based on personal preferences).
- **[CLI options](/reference/global-configs/command-line-options):** Define behavior specific to _this invocation_. Supported for all dbt commands.
```

> The most specific setting "wins." If you set the same flag in all three ways, the CLI option will take precedence, followed by the environment variable, followed lastly by the value in `dbt_project.yml`. If you set the flag in none of those places, it will use the default value defined within dbt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most specific setting "wins." If you set the same flag in all three places, the CLI option will take precedence, followed by the environment variable, and finally, the value in `dbt_project.yml`. If you set the flag in none of those places, it will use the default value defined within dbt.
```

Most flags can be set in all three places:
```yaml
# dbt_project.yml
flags:
  # set default for running this project -- anywhere, anytime, by anyone
  fail_fast: true
```
```bash
# set this environment variable to 'True' (bash syntax)
export DBT_FAIL_FAST=1
dbt run
```
```bash
dbt run --fail-fast # set to True for this specific invocation
dbt run --no-fail-fast # set to False
```

There are two categories of exceptions:

> 1. **Flags setting file paths:** Flags for file paths that are relevant to runtime execution (e.g. `--log-path` or `--state`) cannot be set in `dbt_project.yml`. To override defaults, pass CLI options or set environment variables (`DBT_LOG_PATH`, `DBT_STATE`). Flags that tell dbt where to find project resources (e.g. `model-paths`) are set in `dbt_project.yml`, but as a top-level key, outside the `flags` dictionary; these configs are expected to be fully static and never vary based on the command or execution environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Flags setting file paths:** Flags for file paths that are relevant to runtime execution (for example, `--log-path` or `--state`) cannot be set in `dbt_project.yml`. To override defaults, pass CLI options or set environment variables (`DBT_LOG_PATH`, `DBT_STATE`). Flags that tell dbt where to find project resources (for example, `model-paths`) are set in `dbt_project.yml`, but as a top-level key, outside the `flags` dictionary; these configs are expected to be fully static and never vary based on the command or execution environment.
```

> 2. Flags opting into legacy dbt behaviors can _only_ be defined in `dbt_project.yml`. These are intended to be set in version control, and migrated via pull/merge request. Their values should not diverge indefinitely across invocations, environments, or users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Flags opting into legacy dbt behaviors can _only_ be defined in `dbt_project.yml`. These are intended to be set in version control and migrated via pull/merge request. Their values should not diverge indefinitely across invocations, environments, or users.
```

### Accessing flags

> Custom user-defined logic, written in Jinja, can check the values of flags using [the `flags` context variable](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/flags).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom user-defined logic, written in Jinja, can check the values of flags using [the `flags` context variable](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/flags).
```

```yaml
# dbt_project.yml

on-run-start:
  - '{{ log("I will stop at the first sign of trouble", info = true) if flags.FAIL_FAST }}'
```

> Because the values of `flags` can differ across invocations, we strongly advise against using `flags` as an input to configurations or dependencies (`ref` + `source`) that dbt resolves [during parsing](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/parsing#known-limitations).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the values of `flags` can differ across invocations, we strongly advise against using `flags` as an input to configurations or dependencies (`ref` + `source`) that dbt resolves [during parsing](/reference/parsing#known-limitations).
```

> ### Available flags

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Available flags
```

| [source_freshness_run_project_hooks](/reference/global-configs/legacy-behaviors#source_freshness_run_project_hooks) | boolean | False | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ | ❌ |
| [state](/reference/node-selection/defer) | path | none | ❌ | `DBT_STATE`, `DBT_DEFER_STATE` | `--state`, `--defer-state` | ❌ |
| [static_parser](/reference/global-configs/parsing#static-parser) | boolean | True | ✅ | `DBT_STATIC_PARSER` | `--static-parser`, `--no-static-parser` | ❌ |
| [store_failures](/reference/resource-configs/store_failures) | boolean | False | ✅ (as resource config) | `DBT_STORE_FAILURES` | `--store-failures`, `--no-store-failures` | ✅ |
| [target_path](/reference/global-configs/json-artifacts) | path | none | ❌ | `DBT_TARGET_PATH` | `--target-path` | ❌ |
| [target](/docs/core/connect-data-platform/connection-profiles#about-profiles) | path | None (uses `target/`) | ❌ | `DBT_TARGET` | `--target` | ❌ |
| [use_colors_file](/reference/global-configs/logs#color) | boolean | True | ✅ | `DBT_USE_COLORS_FILE` | `--use-colors-file`, `--no-use-colors-file` | ❌ |
| [use_colors](/reference/global-configs/print-output#print-color) | boolean | True | ✅ | `DBT_USE_COLORS` | `--use-colors`, `--no-use-colors` | ❌ |

> | [use_experimental_parser](/reference/global-configs/parsing#experimental-parser) | boolean | False | ✅ | `DBT_USE_EXPERIMENTAL_PARSER` | `--use-experimental-parser`, `--no-use-experimental-parser` | ❌ |

Reviewer 2: This leads to a dead-end, and I see that we're not version-blocking the deleted text. Should we just remove the entry and the result?

Reviewer: Good call.

Split this feedback into a separate issue to tackle as a follow-up: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/4990

---
title: "About flags (global configs)"
id: "about-global-configs"
sidebar: "About flags (global configs)"
pagination_next: null
---

In dbt, "flags" (also called "global configs") are configurations for fine-tuning _how_ dbt runs your project. They differ from [resource-specific configs](/reference/configs-and-properties) that tell dbt about _what_ to run.

Flags control things like the visual output of logs, whether to treat specific warning messages as errors, or whether to "fail fast" after encountering the first error. Flags are "global" configs because they are available for all dbt commands and they can be set in multiple places.

There is a significant overlap between dbt's flags and dbt's command line options, but there are differences:
- Certain flags can only be set in `dbt_project.yml` and cannot be overridden for specific invocations via CLI options.
- If a CLI option is supported by specific commands, rather than supported by all commands ("global"), it is generally not considered to be a "flag".

### Setting flags

There are multiple ways of setting flags, which depend on the use case:

> - **[Project-level `flags` (`dbt_project.yml`)](/reference/global-configs/project-flags):** Define version-controlled defaults for everyone running this project. Preserve legacy behaviors until their slated deprecation.

Reviewer: Nit -- this suggestion would be a little easier on my eyes.

Also linked to the "legacy behaviors" page at the same time.

```suggestion
- **[Project-level `flags` in `dbt_project.yml`](/reference/global-configs/project-flags):** Define version-controlled defaults for everyone running this project. Preserve [legacy behaviors](/reference/global-configs/legacy-behaviors) until their slated deprecation.
```

Here's how it looks currently:
<img width="540" alt="image" src="https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/assets/44704949/b603a678-6ed8-40ff-bee8-0fe7d8798054">

Most flags can be set in all three places:
```yaml
# dbt_project.yml
flags:
  # set default for running this project -- anywhere, anytime, by anyone
  fail_fast: true
```
```bash
# set this environment variable to 'True' (bash syntax)
export DBT_FAIL_FAST=1
dbt run
```
```bash
dbt run --fail-fast # set to True for this specific invocation
dbt run --no-fail-fast # set to False
```

There are two categories of exceptions:
1. **Flags setting file paths:** Flags for file paths that are relevant to runtime execution (for example, `--log-path` or `--state`) cannot be set in `dbt_project.yml`. To override defaults, pass CLI options or set environment variables (`DBT_LOG_PATH`, `DBT_STATE`). Flags that tell dbt where to find project resources (for example, `model-paths`) are set in `dbt_project.yml`, but as a top-level key, outside the `flags` dictionary; these configs are expected to be fully static and never vary based on the command or execution environment.

> 2. Flags opting into legacy dbt behaviors can _only_ be defined in `dbt_project.yml`. These are intended to be set in version control and migrated via pull/merge request. Their values should not diverge indefinitely across invocations, environments, or users.

Reviewer: Nit -- 1) above has some bold text, so it seems like this should too.

Also linked to the "legacy behaviors" page at the same time.

```suggestion
2. **Opt-in flags:** Flags opting into [legacy dbt behaviors](/reference/global-configs/legacy-behaviors) can _only_ be defined in `dbt_project.yml`. These are intended to be set in version control and migrated via pull/merge request. Their values should not diverge indefinitely across invocations, environments, or users.
```
